# Applications Generation

## Applications
Software can be categorised as either **applications software** or **system software**.

### Application software
**Application software** is a computer program designed to help the user perform a specific activity. It can be categorised into two types of software:
- **General-purpose software** can be used for many different purposes. For example, a graphics processor can be used to edit photos, produces animations and draw vector images.
- **Special-purpose software** performs a single task or set of tasks, for example fingerprint scanning systems.

Software may be bought **off-the-shelf**, ready to use, or it can be custom written for an organisation. This is called **bespoke software**.

Off-the-shelf software | Bespoke software                            
------------ | -------------
Less expensive as cost is shared amongst all the people buying the package | More costly and requires expertise to analyse requirements
May contain unwanted features, or may not contain wanted features | Features customised to user requirements and other features can be added if necessary
Ready to be installed immediately | May take a long time to develop
Well tested and error-free | May contain errors that are not noticed initially

Examples include:
- Word processors
- Web browsers
- Spreadsheets

### Systems software
**System software** is responsible for running the computer system, interacting with hardware and generally providing a platform for applications software to run. This ensures high computer performace for the user, even if the user does not directly interact with system software.

Examples include:
- Operating systems
- Device drivers
- Utility programs

<br>

## Utility Software
Operating systems provide **utilities** that are important to the performance of an OS. Each utility program has a specific function, such as:
- Compression
- Disk defragmentation
- Antivirus
- Automatic updating
- Backups

### Compression
This enables files to be compressed and decompressed. This can be used when large files need to be transmitted across the Internet.

### Disk defragmentation
As the hard drive fills up, it slows down. This is due to files becoming **fragmentated** as they are stored in **non-contigous** locations in memory. This affects the read/write times, as it takes longer for the files to be found if they are not stored in the same place.

However, the **defragmentation** utility rearranges the files in the hard drive to be stored in the same location, improving performance.

### Antivirus
**Antivirus** is responsible for detecting and removing potential threats to the computer.

### Automatic updating
This utility ensures the OS is always kept up to date, with any updates being automatically installed when the computer is restarted. This helps tackle bugs or security flaws, keeping the computer safe from malware threats.

### Backups
The **backup** utility routinely creates copies of specific files selected by the user. How often these files are backed up is also specified by the user. This means backed up files can be recovered in the case of an accident.

<br>

## Open Source and Closed Source
**Source code** refers to the machine code written by a programmer before it has been compiled.

|   | **Definition** | **Advantages** | **Disadvantages**  |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| **Open source software**  | Can be modified, copied or distributed by anyone, with users being able to access the source code| • Can be modified and improved by anyone  <br> • Technical support from community | Technical support online may be incorrect |
| **Proprietry software** | Requires the user to have a license in order to use it. Users cannot access the source code, as the company owns the copyright license  | • Regular updates <br> • High levels of security <br> • Company provides expert technical support | Users cannot modify and improve the software themselves  |

<br>

## Translators
A **translator** is a program that converts high-level source code into low-level machine code. There are three types of translators:
- Assemblers
- Compilers
- Interpreters

### Assemblers
**Assembly code** is a low-level language, just the next level up from machine code. It also depends on the instruction set of the processor, meaning CISC processors offer more functionality for writing assembly code than RISC processors.

### Compilers
Compilers translate high-level code all at once. Compiling the code takes longer than other translators but it doesn't have to be compiled again afterwards, unless changes are made to the code. This means that after the first compilation, code can be run without the need for a translator.

### Interpreters
Translates and executes code line by line. If an error is found, the interpreter will stop at that line and produce an error, which is useful for developers who want to test their code. Although they are initally faster than a compiler, the code must be translated each time it is run with an interpreter, whereas a compiler only needs to be translate code once.


















