# Methodologies

This file contains information about:
- Waterfall Method
- The Spiral Method
- Agile Methodologies
- Extreme Programming
- Rapid Application Development

<br>

## Waterfall Method
The Waterfall Method is a software development process where progress flows steadily toward the conclusion (like a waterfall) through the phases of a project, e.g. analysis, design, development, testing).

Advantages: Clear structure, useful in predicting budget and time.

Disadvantages: Not very flexible, focuses too little on the client or user.

<br>

## The Spiral Method
The Spiral Method shares several similar aspects with the Waterfall Method. The Spiral Method takes on different elements of different process models based on unique risk patterns for the most efficient software development process.

Advantages: More flexible, fast development, and space for customer feedback.

Disadvantages: Risky as it may not meet the schedule or budget, and not expensive for smaller projects.

<br>

## Agile Methodologies
The Agile development model results in small incremental releases with each release building on previous functionality. This model is used for time critical applications.

Advantages: New changes can be implemented at very little cost, and close, daily cooperation between business people and developers.

Disadvantages: Risky as it may not meet the schedule or budget, and expensive for smaller projects.

<br>

## Extreme Programming
Extreme Programming is based on iterative processes. Instead of completing a large project in one go and investing many months of work only to find afterwards that the final product isn’t right, Extreme Programming dictates that work is continuously tested, discussed and released in short cycles. This way, mistakes can be detected and eliminated quickly.

Advantages: Flexible, no unnecessary programming, and close contact with the customer.

Disadvantages: Relatively high costs, requires self-discipline to practice.

<br>

## Rapid Application Development
Rapid Application Development model is based on prototyping without any specific planning. In the RAD model, there is less attention paid to the planning and more priority is given to the development tasks. Its aim is developing software in a short span of time.

Advantages: Adaptable and flexible to changes, and useful when you have to reduce the overall project risk.

Disadvantages: Can’t be used for smaller projects, and when the technical risk is too high, RAD is not suitable.

