# Programming Techniques

## Programming Constructs
Types of Constructs:
- A **Sequence** is when tasks are carried out step by step.
- **Selection** is when a condition needs to be met before the next step can be carried out.
- **Iteration** is when a task is repeated a certain number of times or until a condition is met.
  - Count-controlled iteration: Iteration is repeated a certain number of times
  - Condition-controlled iteration: Iteration is repeated until a condition is met

<br>

## Recursion
Sometimes a problem is too difficult or too complex to solve because it is too big. If the problem can be broken down into smaller versions of itself, we may be able to find a way to solve one of these smaller versions and then be able to build up to a solution to the entire problem. This is the idea behind **recursion**; recursive algorithms break down a problem into smaller pieces which you either already know the answer to, or can solve by applying the same algorithm to each piece, and then combining the results.

In python, recursion can be used by calling a function within the function itself, as shown below:

```python
def function(n):
  if n > 0:
    n -= 1
    function(n)    
 
function(5)
```

A more developed use of recursion can be accessed by clicking the link:
[Factorial using Recursion](https://github.com/JMorr4/Computer-Science/blob/main/Contents/Recursion.md)

<br>

## Global and Local Variables

### Local Variables
Local variables in python are variables declared within a function, as seen below:

```python
def function():
  n = "Hello"
  print(n)
  
function()
```

This will output ```Hello```, because the variable is known within the function. However, when the print statement is called outside the function...

```python
def function():
  n = "Hello"

function()
print(n)
```
<br>

### Global Variables
In python, global variables are useful in dealing with functions. Usually a programmer would use ```return n``` to pass the variable out of the function, but one way of getting round this is to declare the variable global, using ```global(n)```, as seen below:

``` python
def function(n):
  n += 1
  return n

function()
```

``` python
def function(n):
  global(n)
  n += 1

function()
```

<br>

## Modularity, Functions and Procedures

**Functions** in python allow a code to be used repeatedly. By passing in values through **parameters**, the function can make use of variables outside the function, without only being able to use local variables. If the function modifies the variable passed in, or wants to pass out a local variable, then it has to use parameters again to **globalise** the variable.

**Modular Programming** is when complex programs are broken down into smaller subroutines that make it easier to understand.

<br>

## Uses of an IDE

Common tools and facilities available:
- **Editors** allow programmers to edit their code
- **Error diagnostics** present information following an error and assist in identifying the cause of the error
- **Run-time environment** give the user a running diagnosis of their code
- **Translators** complile the code, converting the high level language into machine code for the computer to understand

<br>

## Object Oriented Programming

Object Oriented Programming (OOP), uses many of the same structures as **procedural programming**. OOP uses classes to create objects that are independant from the rest of the program, such as variables and methods.
- A **method** is a function within a class
- A **procedure** is a function that doesn't return a value
- A **constructor** is used to create objects in a class

In OOP, the world is viewed as a collection of objects, such as an animal or event. Coding OOP allows these objects to be created and to communicate with each other:
- Each object will have its own variables, which are called **attributes**. The attributes of a car might include its colour or engine size.
- Each object has a **state**. For example, a radio may be turned on or off, or a bank account may have a particular balance.
- Each object has **behaviours**. These are actions performed by the object, such as a car that can accelerate, brake, and turn.

Messages can be categorised as either "getter" or "setter" messages:
- "getter" messages are written as **functions** which return an answer
- "setter" messages are written as **procedures** which change the state of an object

<br>

### Encapsulation

An object encapsulates both its state and its behaviours. This means that attributes and behaviours of one object cannot affect another. **Encapsulation** means that in large projects, programmers can work on different classes and not have to worry about it being affected by other parts of the system.

**Information hiding** means that a programmer can use a method without understanding how it works.

<br>

### Inheritance

A "child class" in OOP is referred to as a **subclass**, and a "parent class" is referred to as a **superclass**. Subclasses can **inherit** data from a superclass. This can be used when the "child class" has a realtionship to its "parent class".

<br>

### Polymorphism

When a "child class" inherits from a "parent class", it inherits the "parent class" methods and attributes. In **polymorphism**, the "child class" can change each of these methods. For example, if the "parent class" passed down the attribute colour as red, the "child class" can change that colour to blue, but still keep the same name and argument type. This is called **overriding**.

<br>

An example of an OOP project can be found [here](https://github.com/JMorr4/Computer-Science/blob/main/Contents/Python%20Projects/Farm%20Project/Farm.md)























