# Data Structures

## Arrays, Lists and Tuples

### Arrays
- An **array** is an ordered set of values of the same type.
- A 1D array is a linear array.
- A 2D array can be visualised as a table, with rows and columns.
- A 3D array can be visualised as a multi-page spreadsheet
  - An element in a 3D array is created using: threeDimensionalArray[z,y,x], where z = array number, y = row number, x = column number.

### Lists
- A **list** is an ordered set of values of potentially different data types, where the same items can appear more than once.
- Data from this list can be stored in non-contiguous locations.

### Tuples
- An ordered set of values of any data type.
- Cannot be changed: elements cannot be added, edited or removed once the tuple is created.
- Created using regular brackets instead of square brackets.

<br>

## Linked Lists, Stacks and Queues

### Linked Lists
- **Dynamic data structure** used to hold an ordered sequence, where items do not have to be in contiguous data locations.
- Each item is called a **node**, and contains a data field and a pointer field:
  - The **data field** contains the actual data associated with the list.
  - The **pointer field** contains the address of the next item in the list.

### Stacks
- **Last in First out data** structure:
  - Items can only be added to or removed from the top of the stack.
  - Stacks are used to reverse actions, so are used in backspace keys, etc.
  - Able to have a static or dynamic structure.

```
print("Welcome to the fruit restaurant!")

fruitStack = ['Banana', 'Grapes', 'Pear']

print(fruitStack)
userFruitAdd = input("Which fruit would you like to add to your fruit salad? ")

fruitStack.pop()
fruitStack.append(userFruitAdd)
print("\nFruit added:", userFruitAdd)
 
print('Current fruit salad:')
print(fruitStack)
```

### Queues
- **First in First out** data structure:
  - Items are added to the end and are removed from the front of the queue.
- A **queue** is a form of **linked list** data structure, and is commonly used in printers and keyboards.
- A linear queue contains an array, where items are added into the next available space, starting from the front.
  - Items are removed from the front of the queue
  - Uses two pointers: pointing to the front and back of the queue.
  - Use space inefficiently, as positions from which data has been removed cannot be reused
- Circular queues have a rear pointer that can loop back to the front of the queue and utilise empty space at the front.
  - Are harder to implement

```
fruitSaladQueue = ["Banana", "Pear", "Mango"]
 
print("Current fruit salad")
print(fruitSaladQueue)

userAddFruit = input("Which fruit would you like to add?")

fruitSaladQueue.insert(0, userAddFruit)

print("Current fruit salad:")
print(fruitSaladQueue)

undo = input("Undo? Y/N: ")

if undo == "Y":
    fruitSaladQueue.pop(0)

elif undo == "N":
    print("Ok")

else:
    print("Try again")

print(fruitSaladQueue)
```




















